---
paper id: 2505.17612v2
title: Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools
authors: [Minki Kang, Jongwon Jeong, Seanie Lee, Jaewoong Cho, Sung Ju Hwang]
publication date: 2025-05-23T08:20
abstract: "Large language models (LLMs) excel at complex reasoning tasks but remain computationally expensive, limiting their practical deployment. To address this, recent works have focused on distilling reasoning capabilities into smaller language models (sLMs) using chain-of-thought (CoT) traces from teacher LLMs. However, this approach struggles in scenarios requiring rare factual knowledge or precise computation, where sLMs often hallucinate due to limited capability. In this work, we propose Agent Distillation, a framework for transferring not only reasoning capability but full task-solving behavior from LLM-based agents into sLMs with retrieval and code tools. We improve agent distillation along two complementary axes: (1) we introduce a prompting method called first-thought prefix to enhance the quality of teacher-generated trajectories; and (2) we propose a self-consistent action generation for improving test-time robustness of small agents. We evaluate our method on eight reasoning tasks across factual and mathematical domains, covering both in-domain and out-of-domain generalization. Our results show that sLMs as small as 0.5B, 1.5B, 3B parameters can achieve performance competitive with next-tier larger 1.5B, 3B, 7B models fine-tuned using CoT distillation, demonstrating the potential of agent distillation for building practical, tool-using small agents. Our code is available at https://github.com/Nardien/agent-distillation."
comments: NeurIPS 2025 Spotlight
pdf: "[[Master Thesis Papers/Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf]]"
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.17612v2
tags: []
---
#read #slms #distillation #small_agents
#fine_tuning 

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=1&selection=42,69,59,51&color=yellow|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.1]]
> > In this work, we propose Agent Distillation, a framework for transferring not only reasoning capability but full task-solving behavior from LLM-based agents into sLMs with retrieval and code tools. We improve agent distillation along two complementary axes: (1) we introduce a prompting method called first-thought prefix to enhance the quality of teacher-generated trajectories; and (2) we propose a self-consistent action generation for improving test-time robustness of small agents.

> [!PDF] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=2&selection=288,0,295,62|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.2]]
> > Chain-of-Thought (CoT) distillation trains student models to mimic static reasoning traces from LLMs, but often fails when new knowledge or precise computation is needed at test time. Our proposed agent distillation instead teaches student models to think and act (e.g., retrieve facts or execute code) offering stronger generalization and better robustness to hallucination
> 
>  **Concept overview**

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=2&selection=326,0,332,81&color=yellow|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.2]]
> > Although recent advancements in pre- and post-training methods have steadily increased the capabilities of sLMs [15 ], sLMs still struggle to solve complex tasks at the level of LLMs. To address this, recent works have explored reasoning distillation, where sLMs are trained to mimic CoT reasoning traces generated by teacher LLMs through next-token prediction [10, 11, 1, 16, 17
> 
> 


> [!PDF|red] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=2&selection=346,0,369,39&color=red|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.2]]
> > In this work, we propose Agent Distillation, a framework that moves beyond static reasoning to distill the ability to take action with tools, from LLM agents (e.g., ReAct [ 20], CodeAct [ 21]) into sLMs through reason-act-observe trajectories. Our goal is to equip sLMs with agentic capabilities: reasoning through problems, taking actions to use code or retrieval tools, observing outcomes, and refining their approach—cloning the behavior of LLM agents. This approach offers two key advantages: (1) sLMs focus on learning how to reason and act to solve problems using tools, rather than memorizing knowledge and calculations, and (2) they generalize better to new queries requiring previously unseen facts or calculations
> 
> 

> [!PDF|red] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=3&selection=27,0,62,30&color=red|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.3]]
> > To summarize, our work makes the following key contributions: • We propose Agent Distillation, a framework for training sLMs to imitate trajectories from LLM agents, enabling agentic behavior without memorizing factual knowledge and calculations. • We introduce two methods to overcome limitations of naive distillation: (1) a first-thought prefix for improving teacher trajectory, and (2) self-consistent action generation to boost test-time robustness. • We validate our method across 8 factual and mathematical reasoning benchmarks, showing strong performance across domains and student model scales (0.5B-7B) compared to CoT distillation. • Remarkably, we demonstrate that even 0.5B, 1.5B, and 3B models distilled with our method can achieve comparable performance to next-tier larger models distilled with CoT on average.


> [!PDF|yellow] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=3&selection=197,0,227,1&color=yellow|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.3]]
> > Unlike prior work, which primarily focused on fine-tuning LLMs (≥ 7B) on trajectories from stronger close-sourced LLMs (e.g., GPT-4 [ 12 ] in FireAct [ 34]), our work aims to distill the agentic capabilities of LLMs into much smaller models (sLMs, ≤ 3B), enabling them to operate as capable agents. We address key challenges such as improving the quality of teacher trajectories and optimizing student behavior at test time, building on improved agent framework [ 21 ]

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=4&selection=325,0,428,76&color=yellow|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.4]]
> > Following prior works [34 , 52 ], we fine-tune the student model on generated trajectories, excluding observations from the loss: min θ −Ex∼Dtrain,τ ∼πT (·|x,Iagent) LτX t=1 log pS (rt, at | x, τ<t; θ), (4) where τ<t = ((r1, a1, o1), . . . , (rt−1, at−1, ot−1)). This distillation enables student models to function as interactive agents. 
> > **Agent distillation**

> [!PDF|note] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=4&selection=443,0,452,95&color=note|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.4]]
> > Despite its promise, agent distillation presents two key challenges, particularly when applied to small language models (sLMs). First, agentic behavior often lies out-of-distribution relative to the pretraining and instruction-tuning distribution of both teacher and student models. As a result, distilling such behavior may degrade performance on domains where the student is already well-optimized for CoT-style reasoning. Second, although sLMs are pretrained on large code corpora [ 62], they may struggle to produce functional code during inference. Typical failure cases include misformatted code outputs or incorrect usage of library functions, which hinder the ability of agents to interact
> 
> 

> [!PDF|red] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=5&selection=209,35,219,10&color=red|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.5]]
> > rior studies have shown that the initial reasoning step critically determines the final conclusion of LLMs [ 63– 65 ], ensuring that the model begins reasoning in an appropriate direction during its first action generation becomes essential for maintaining accurate reasoning.
> 
> **[NOTE] Important**

> [!PDF|red] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=5&selection=340,29,355,96&color=red|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.5]]
> > To improve robustness in action generation, we introduce self-consistent action generation (sag). Instead of using greedy decoding, we sample multiple N thought-action sequences for each step through nucleus sampling [ 69 ] with a high temperature to encourage diversity. We then filter out any sequences that result in parsing or execution errors using a lightweight code interpreter. When all generated actions fail, we retain one randomly selected failed action and feed its error message back as an observation, allowing the model to self-correct in subsequent steps
> 
> **[NOTE] Maybe nice to add to the agentic framewrok?**

> [!PDF|red] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=6&selection=73,0,92,21&color=red|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.6]]
> > Tasks and datasets. We evaluate two categories of reasoning tasks: factual and mathematical. For each, we assess both in-domain and out-of-domain generalization. We use 1,000 HotPotQA [2] and 2,000 MATH [6 ] examples for training. For test benchmarks, we summarize them in Table 1. To reduce evaluation cost, we limit each test set to 500 examples, following Wang et al. [71] . As a metric, we use exact match for math and llm-as-a-judge [72] using gpt-4o-mini for factual reasoning
> 
> **Factual Reasoning & Math Reasoning datasets**

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=6&selection=181,0,193,65&color=yellow|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.6]]
> > We fine-tune student models using parameter-efficient tuning with LoRA (rank 64) on all linear layers [75]. All models are fine-tuned for 2 epochs using a batch size of 8 and a learning rate of 2 · 10−4. All experiments are conducted using four NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs.
> 
> training details



> [!PDF|red] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=9&selection=178,0,211,95&color=red|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.9]]
> > Self-consistency improves CoT, but the agent with SAG still performs better. Self-consistent action generation (sag) enhances small agents by filtering out invalid code actions and retaining only those that are consistent with observations. Similarly, self-consistency [ 70 ] can be applied at test time in Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning to improve performance without relying on an external verifier. A natural question is whether CoT with self-consistency, using the same computational budget, can outperform an agent with sag. To investigate this, we conduct experiments using self-consistency [ 70 ] on CoT-distilled small language models (sLMs), applying majority voting over multiple samples. As shown in Figure 5, in the MATH benchmark—where CoT already surpasses the agent with sag— self-consistency further improves the performance of the CoT-distilled model. However, in the more challenging AIME benchmark, the small agent with sag still outperforms the CoT-distilled model under the same generation budget. Moreover, in factual reasoning tasks such as HotpotQA and MuSiQue, self-consistency yields only marginal gains, suggesting limited effectiveness in these settings
> 
> **[NOTE]** possibly add SAG/self-consistency to the framework, especially given this:
> 
> > [!PDF|red] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=10&selection=45,0,57,1&color=red|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.10]]
> > Impact of Self-consistent Action Generation (sag) on code generation errors across models and 3 math datasets. sag consistently reduces code parse (dark) and code execution (light) errors, especially for smaller models (0.5B) and the AIME dataset.

> [!PDF|yellow] [[Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2).pdf#page=10&selection=172,0,195,82&color=yellow|Distilling LLM Agent into Small Models with Retrieval and Code Tools (2505.17612v2), p.10]]
> > Limitations & Future Works. While our method shows strong overall performance, it also highlights several open challenges. The first-thought prefix (ftp) improves agent distillation on average, underscoring the importance of high-quality teacher trajectory generation for effective distillation. However, ftp can sometimes degrade performance, especially when the model generates facts during reasoning instead of leveraging tools (Figure 8). This highlights the need for improved agentic trajectory generation strategies that align with the behavior and limitations of small models. The success of self-consistent action generation (sag) (Figure 7) suggests the potential of test-time compute scaling and opens up opportunities for incorporating process-level reward models [78, 79]. Finally, while agent distillation enhances the sLMs through agentic behavior, it does not directly improve their core reasoning abilities. Reinforcement learning in tool-augmented environments [48 , 54, 80] could further refine these models post-distillation across diverse domains
> 
> **Limitations and future work**

